In the present study, data were collected in three phases. In the
first phase, we collected qualitative data from children to determine
item wording. In the second phase, we used experts in the field to
facilitate the choice of best items. In the third phase, we tested the
items and used factor analysis to determine the content of the final
scale.
In Phase 1, a questionnaire was drafted and administered to 31
children, ages 9 through 12, who were enrolled in private music
lessons from eight different music studios. Satisfaction was operationally
defined as "liking," or "disliking." Children were asked openended
questions, including what they liked and disliked about their
private music lessons, their private music teacher, the music they
played, improving their abilities, practicing, and peer and parental
influences. This questionnaire yielded a list of 153 positive and negative
statements from the children. Seventy-eight of the children's
responses were discarded by the principal investigator of the study
because they were too ambiguous, too general, or too specific. For
example, some of the discarded responses included statements such
as "Nothing," "I just started with him," and "I have no problem."
In Phase 2, the remaining 75 statements were given to nine teachers
who specialized in musical instrument instruction with children,
ages 9 to 12. These music teachers were asked to independently identify
the statements that they thought were important to children taking
private music lessons. A statement was selected to be an item in
the scale if at least three teachers indicated that it was important.
This resulted in a preliminary scale containing 45 items.
In Phase 3, the preliminary 45-item scale containing both positively
and negatively worded statements was administered to a sample
of 568 children who were all taking private music lessons. All items
began with either "I like ...," "I don't like ...," "I enjoy ...," or, "The
best part...." Children were asked what they liked and disliked about
their own private lessons using a 5-point Likert format with the following
choices: (1) I disagree very much, (2) I disagree, (3) I do not
know, (4) I agree, or (5) I agree very much. A brief demographic
questionnaire was included, as well as a 10-point single-item Overall
Rating Scale (10-point ORS) that each child was asked to complete
by rating his or her private music lessons overall. The 10-point ORS
ranged from 1 (Very Bad) to 10 (Very Good).
Participants
The 568 participants in the third data-collection phase were children,
ages 9 to 12, who were all taking private music lessons. The
children were assessed at private music studios, public and private
schools, youth orchestras, and a music festival (see the note at the
end of this article). The mean age of the participants was 10.7 years.
Approximately 14% of the participants were age 9; 29% were age 10;
Downloaded from jrm.sagepub.com at SWETS WISE ONLINE CONTENT on October 27, 2012
JRME 25
30% were age 11; and 27% were age 12. Grade 5 was the mean school
grade level, with a range from Grade 3 to 8. Approximately 61% of
the participants were girls, and 36% were boys (3% of the children
did not indicate their gender). Approximately 34% of the participants
played the piano, 19% played the violin, 9% played the flute,
9% played the cello, 6% played the clarinet, and 6% played the saxophone.
Less than 5% of children played the baritone, bass, bassoon,
drums, French horn, guitar, harp, oboe, percussion, trombone, trumpet,
or viola. Approximately 12% of the children did not indicate
which instrument they played. Approximately 88% of the flute players,
75% of pianists, and 61% of the violinists were girls. Approximately
100% of the trombone, baritone, and bass players were boys,
as were 94% of the trumpeters and 67% of the saxophone players.
Overview of the Analyses
Due to the exploratory nature of the present study, no assumptions
were made as to whether music lesson satisfaction was a unidimensional
or a multidimensional construct. Thus, both Varimax
orthogonal and Direct Oblimin oblique rotations were performed
for the factor analyses. As significant correlations were found among
the factors in the Varimax rotation, it was decided to use the Direct
Oblimin oblique rotation. Direct Oblimin factor analysis results are
reported for the present study using a Principal Components
Analysis extraction method, with a maximum of 25 iterations for convergence
and delta = 0. Power analysis indicated that a sample of 568
children was sufficient for the factor analysis.
As previously stated, the aim of the study was to examine factors
associated with children's private music lesson satisfaction and to
produce a practical scale, the Music Lesson Satisfaction Scale
(MLSS), that could be easily administered to children, ages 9 to 12.
To achieve these objectives, items were excluded for the final version
of the scale using the following criteria: First, items were eliminated
if they had factor loadings less than .40. Second, negatively stated
items were eliminated as they elicited a large proportion of "I don't
know" responses. These responses may have been due to the children
not understanding these items. The rationale to omit negatively
worded items was supported by Rifkin et al. (1988) in their study
examining children's satisfaction with medical care.
Statistically significant associations between the MLSS and the 10-
point ORS were examined using Pearson correlation coefficients
(two-tailed significance). A three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was constructed to determine if there were any differences on the
MLSS by gender, age, or musical instrument categories (e.g., strings,
woodwinds, brass, piano, and percussion), and to test for the presence
of any possible interaction effects. Gender, age, and musical
instrument categories were the independent variables, and the MLSS
mean score was the dependent variable.
