In-depth, open-ended interviews27,29 were conducted in person with physician, nursing, quality management, and administrative staff described by directors of quality assurance or quality management as key staff involved with improving the care of patients with AMI. Between 4 and 7 individuals considered to be key respondents were interviewed at each hospital, for a total number of 45 key respondents interviewed. These included 8 cardiologists, 4 internists, 2 emergency medicine physicians, 15 members of nursing staff, 11 members of quality management staff, and 5 members of senior administrative staff. Interviews were generally conducted with a single respondent, except when sites preferred to have multiple respondents participating together. Interviews were each 1 to 1½ hours in length, as is typical with in-depth interviewing.29 Interviews were generally conducted by at least 2 members of the research team, which included investigators with diverse backgrounds in internal medicine and cardiology, epidemiology, health administration, and nursing. All researchers had substantial backgrounds and expertise in quality improvement. At least 2 interviewers were present at nearly all interviews; all interviews were audiotaped and transcribed by independent professional transcriptionists.

Interviews were conducted using a standard interview guide, with probes for clarification and additional detail. The interview guide began with the standard "grand tour"27 question, "In the last 3 years, please describe the major initiatives your hospital has undertaken to improve care of patients with AMI." Specific probes concerning initiatives targeted at β-blocker use followed this question. For each initiative, respondents were asked to describe specific instances of difficulty and of success in implementing change in their hospital. In addition, respondents were asked about their experiences related to data monitoring and feedback, physician leadership, and sustaining change. For all areas of inquiry, respondents were encouraged to illustrate their experiences with specific stories or vignettes.
