Transcribed data were analyzed using common coding techniques for qualitative data28,30 and the constant comparative method of qualitative data analysis.27 Coding of the data was accomplished in a series of iterative steps. An initial code list was used to organize transcripts of the first 2 site visits and was then refined during review and analysis of transcripts from subsequent site visits. During its development, the code structure was reviewed 3 times by the full research team for logic and breadth. The process of refining the code structure included adding and reconstructing codes as new insights emerged and identifying new relationships within units of a given category. A total of 72 specific codes organized within several broad themes were ultimately developed and served as the basis for final text review and organization of the transcript data.

Using this final version of the code structure, members of the research team (E.H.B., J.A.M., S.A.R.) independently coded all transcripts, then met as a group to code in several joint sessions, achieving consensus and assigning codes to observations by a negotiated, group process. Coded data were entered into a software package designed to handle unstructured qualitative data (NUD*IST 4, Sage Publications Software, Thousand Oaks, Calif) to assist in reporting recurrent themes, links among the themes, and supporting quotations. Specific analysis was conducted to identify distinctions in common themes between higher-performing hospitals (those in which ≥65% vs those in which <65% of all patients with AMI were prescribed β-blockers at discharge during the follow-up period).

Several techniques were used to ensure that data analysis was systematic and verifiable, as commonly recommended by experts in qualitative research.28 These included consistent use of the discussion guide, audiotaping and independent professional preparation of the transcripts, standardized coding and analysis of the data, and the creation of an analysis audit trail to document analytic decisions. The interviewers, the individuals who listened to and transcribed the interview tapes, and those coding the transcript data were blinded to the rates of β-blocker use among the study hospitals.
